Add KHR_materials_retroreflection extension (#2610)
KhronosGroup/glTF: extensions/2.0/Khronos/KHR_materials_retroreflection/README.md

# KHR_materials_retroreflection

## Contributors

* Martin-Karl Lefrançois, NVIDIA, [@mklefrancois](https://github.com/mklefrancois)
* Nia Bickford, NVIDIA, [@NBickford-NV](https://github.com/NBickford-NV)

## Status

Draft

## Dependencies

Written against the glTF 2.0 spec.

> 

Reviewer: Taking care of non-supported material models

```suggestion
## Exclusions

- This extension must not be used on a material that also uses `KHR_materials_pbrSpecularGlossiness`.
- This extension must not be used on a material that also uses `KHR_materials_unlit`.
```

## Overview

> This extension adds a physically-plausible retroreflective response to any glTF material model.

Reviewer: OpenPBR only changes the core opaque specular BRDFs. Lobes such as clearcoat and sheen remain unchanged. glTF should do the same.

```suggestion
This extension adds a physically-plausible retroreflective response to the metallic and dielectric BRDFs of the glTF metallic-roughness material model.
```

It is based on the Minimal Retroreflective Microfacet (MRM) model of [Portsmouth et al. (JCGT 15(1), 2026)](http://jcgt.org/published/0015/01/04/),
which turns a BSDF into a retroreflective one by substituting the outgoing view direction $V$ with its reflection about the surface normal, $V_\text{retro} = 2 N (V \cdot N) - V$, before evaluation and sampling.
This redirects the specular peak into the back-scatter direction, producing the bright
retroreflective highlight seen on high-visibility clothing,
glass-bead road markings, many safety signs, and other materials.
In addition, MRM preserves reciprocity and energy conservation under reflection-symmetric NDFs (including GGX, Beckmann, and Phong).

> A *retroreflection weight* then linearly blends between the regular material model (at a factor of 0) and the retroreflective material model (at a factor of 1). This matches the OpenPBR `specular_retroreflectivity` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *retroreflection weight* then linearly blends between the regular metallic and dielectric BRDFs (at a factor of 0) and their retroreflective variants (at a factor of 1). This matches the OpenPBR `specular_retroreflectivity` parameter.
```

</figure>

## Extending Materials

`KHR_materials_retroreflection` can be added to a material's `extensions`, like this:

```json
{
  "materials": [
    {
      "name": "TrafficConeBaseMat",
      "pbrMetallicRoughness": {
        "baseColorTexture": { "index": 0 },
        "metallicFactor": 0.0,
        "roughnessFactor": 0.35
      },
      "extensions": {
        "KHR_materials_retroreflection": {
          "retroreflectionFactor": 1.0,
          "retroreflectionTexture": { "index": 2 }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "extensionsUsed": [ "KHR_materials_retroreflection" ]
}
```

The extension object contains the following properties:

| | Type | Description | Required |
| -------------------------- | -------- | ----------- | ------------------ |
| **retroreflectionFactor** | `number` | Linear blend between forward microfacet (0.0) and retroreflective microfacet (1.0). Range [0, 1]. | No, default: `0.0` |

> | **retroreflectionTexture** | [`textureInfo`](https://registry.khronos.org/glTF/specs/2.0/glTF-2.0.html#reference-textureinfo) | Per-texel multiplier for `retroreflectionFactor`, sampled from the **R** channel. Values outside [0,1] are clamped. | No |

Reviewer 2: Ditto.

* $V$ is the direction from the surface to the outgoing light (for a renderer that only computes direct lighting, this is the view direction)
* $\text{mat}$ includes the material properties at the shading point, including the surface normal $N$,

its retroreflective BSDF is

$$f_\text{retro}(L, V, \text{mat}) = f(L, V_\text{retro}, \text{mat})$$

where $V_\text{retro}$ is $V$ reflected about the normal $N$:

$$V_\text{retro} = \texttt{reflect}(-V, N) = 2 N (V \cdot N) - V.$$

Then this extension replaces $f$ with

$$f_\text{blended} = \texttt{mix}(f, f_\text{retro}, w)$$

where $w$ is the per-shading-point weight from the [Extending Materials](#extending-materials) section.

The
same $V \to V_\text{retro}$ substitution is used when sampling $f_\text{retro}$ and when
evaluating its PDF; see Listing 1 of Portsmouth et al. 2026.

### Note on BTDFs

Implementations may choose to replace $V$ by $V_\text{retro}$ in the BSDF for the entire material to form a retroreflective BSDF for the entire material. This is often simpler to implement because one can apply the $V \to V_\text{retro}$ substitution at a higher level rather than in individual lobes.

> However, as described in Section 5 of Portsmouth et al. 2026, this produces nonintuitive results for transmissive materials, especially when the index of refraction $\eta$ is near 1. Therefore, this specification recommends applying retroreflection only to reflective lobes, which also matches OpenPBR and MaterialX's retroreflection implementations.

Reviewer: I suggest splitting this section into a normative part that specifies how to integrate the new feature with the base metal-roughness model described in [Appendix B](https://registry.khronos.org/glTF/specs/2.0/glTF-2.0.html#appendix-b-brdf-implementation), and a non-normative part that provides information about the MRM implementation. This keeps the extension flexible by allowing different ways to implement retroreflection.

Example using the notation style and definitions of Appendix B:

---

## Retroreflection

If this extension is present on a material, then it replaces the metallic BRDF and dielectric BRDF of the glTF metallic-roughness material, as defined in [Appendix B](https://registry.khronos.org/glTF/specs/2.0/glTF-2.0.html#appendix-b-brdf-implementation), with blends between the original BRDFs and retroreflective variants.

Let `metal_brdf_retro` and `dielectric_brdf_retro` be retroreflective variants of `metal_brdf` and `dielectric_brdf`, respectively, increasing the reflective response in the back-scatter direction.

```
metal_brdf =
  mix(metal_brdf, metal_brdf_retro, w)

dielectric_brdf =
  mix(dielectric_brdf, dielectric_brdf_retro, w)
```

where $w$ is the per-shading-point weight from the [Extending Materials](#extending-materials) section.

The final material is then evaluated as defined in Appendix B:

```
material = mix(dielectric_brdf, metal_brdf, metallic)
```

## Implementation

*This section is non-normative.*

A straightforward implementation of the retroreflective variants is the Minimal Retroreflective Microfacet (MRM) model of [Portsmouth et al. (JCGT 15(1), 2026)](http://jcgt.org/published/0015/01/04/). Using the notation from Appendix B, MRM substitutes the reflected view direction $V_\text{retro}$ for $V$ when evaluating and sampling the affected BRDFs:

$$V_\text{retro} = \texttt{reflect}(-V, N) = 2 N (V \cdot N) - V.$$

All intermediate quantities derived from $V$, including the half vector $H$ and Fresnel terms, are evaluated using $V_\text{retro}$ for the retroreflective variants. The same $V \to V_\text{retro}$ substitution is used when sampling the retroreflective BRDF and evaluating its PDF; see Listing 1 of Portsmouth et al. 2026. When sampling the blended BRDF as a mixture, its PDF is the corresponding weighted sum.

As described in Section 5 of Portsmouth et al. 2026, applying the substitution to BTDFs produces nonintuitive results for transmissive materials. This extension therefore applies retroreflection only to the metallic and dielectric BRDFs, matching OpenPBR and MaterialX.

## Optional vs. Required

This extension should not be listed in the `extensionsRequired` list, as retroreflectivity is generally not significant enough to justify blocking the entire scene from loading. We use "should not" instead of "must not" here, though, because there are some cases where retroreflectivity is so important to an object that it justifies listing this extension under `extensionsRequired`.

## Schema

* [material.KHR_materials_retroreflection.schema.json](schema/material.KHR_materials_retroreflection.schema.json)

## Sample Asset

> A [traffic_cone](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glTF-Sample-Assets/blob/main/Models/TrafficCone/traffic_cone/traffic_cone.gltf) sample contains a traffic cone with a retroreflective material using the `retroreflectionFactor` and `retroreflectionTexture` parameters, alongside the same cone with a non-retroreflective material for comparison. It includes `KHR_lights_punctual` for directional lighting (note though that `KHR_materials_retroreflection` does not depend on `KHR_lights_punctual`). [The original model](https://sketchfab.com/3d-models/traffic-cone-573feef839d7450cb3e12da9986e7a98) was created by [hinndia](https://sketchfab.com/hinndia), modified by Martin-Karl Lefrançois to add retroreflection, and is licensed under [CC-BY-4.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/); see [license.txt](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glTF-Sample-Assets/blob/main/Models/TrafficCone/traffic_cone/license.txt).

Reviewer: To my knowledge, extensions usually don't refer to sample assets. Remove?

```
material = mix(dielectric_brdf_blended, metal_brdf_blended, metallic)
```

## Implementation

*This section is non-normative.*

The Minimal Retroreflective Microfacet (MRM) model of [Portsmouth et al. (JCGT 15(1), 2026)](http://jcgt.org/published/0015/01/04/) provides a straightforward method for producing the retroreflective variants. Using the notation from Appendix B, MRM uses the reflected view direction `V_retro` instead of `V` when evaluating or sampling either affected BRDF:

`V_retro = reflect(-V, N) = 2 * N * dot(V, N) - V`.

All intermediate quantities derived from `V`, including the half vector `H` and Fresnel terms, are evaluated using `V_retro` for the retroreflective variants. In other words, if the regular BRDF is a function `f(L, V)` taking the light direction `L` and reflected view direction `V` at a point, then the MRM BRDF is `f(L, reflect(-V, N))`.

The same `V` to `V_retro` substitution is used when sampling the retroreflective BRDF and evaluating its PDF; see Listing 1 of Portsmouth et al. 2026.

## Excluding Other Lobes

*This section is non-normative.*

> While it is possible to apply the MRM model transformation to any BSDF, this extension intentionally does not apply retroreflectivity to the additional BSDFs introduced by other extensions. This matches the behavior of retroreflection within OpenPBR and MaterialX's implementations.

Reviewer 3: Could you clarify how retroreflection composes with extensions that modify the metallic and dielectric BRDFs, especially anisotropy and iridescence? The spec clearly excludes additional lobes such as clearcoat, sheen, and transmission, but does not say whether BRDF modifiers are applied before the `V` substitution. Sample Renderer PR 50 currently evaluates its retro branch without anisotropy or iridescence; Babylon keeps both inside the base retro variant. A sentence defining that ordering would prevent divergent implementations.

Author: Thanks for asking for clarification, @bghgary!

Matthias Raab, one of the spec authors, confirmed this. "BRDF modifiers like iridescence should be applied after the V substitution, i.e., using the mirrored view direction, not the original one." The reasoning is that these effects are direction-dependent; therefore, for the combined result to be well-defined, the modifiers need to see the same view vector that the retro lobe itself uses.

Practically, that means:

- Anisotropy and iridescence should be evaluated inside the retro branch using the mirrored V and not be skipped or computed against the pre-mirror V.
- Regarding https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glTF-Sample-Renderer/pull/50, this was an oversight and will be fixed. Thanks for reporting this.

Author: A fix was applied in https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glTF-Sample-Renderer/pull/50.

Now re-applies whichever BRDF-direction/Fresnel modifiers are active (anisotropy's bent-normal reflection, iridescence's Fresnel tint) using V_retro, instead of falling back to the isotropic non-iridescent base BRDF. Clearcoat/sheen/transmission remain excluded per the spec's "Excluding Other Lobes" section.
